Add best practices for STAC Zarr (#29)
radiantearth/stac-best-practices: best-practices-zarr-ndarray.md

Reviewer: maybe it's better to leave proj:shape which represents the coordinates layer. Even if there is no projection it still has a shape. For rasters without projection combination of `"proj:shape": [int, int]` and `"proj:code": null` works just fine.
Keep in mind that "proj:shape" should support only the list of two elements, as described below:
<img width="1038" height="63" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/869528f9-7582-409f-af23-6399bf76b3f8" />

> # STAC Zarr and N-Dimensional Array Best Practices

Reviewer 2: Does it deserve its own markdown file, or should it be somehow merged with "assets and links" best practices?

- Asset metadata for multi-resolution and hierarchical data structures

The following specifications and extensions are discussed in this document:

- [STAC v1.1](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/tree/v1.1.0)
- [Datacube Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/datacube)
- [Raster Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/raster)
- [Electro Optical (EO) Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/eo)
- [Projection Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/projection)

## Glossary

### Zarr Terminology

See the [Zarr specification](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/#concepts-and-terminology) for complete terminology.

Key terms:

- **Zarr Store**: A storage system that can hold a Zarr hierarchy (e.g., a directory, zip file, or object store prefix)
- **Group**: A node in a Zarr hierarchy that can contain arrays and/or other groups
- **Array**: A multidimensional array with chunked storage
- **Chunk**: A contiguous region of an array that is stored as a single object
- **Consolidated Metadata**: A single metadata document containing the metadata for all arrays and groups in a store

> ### STAC-Specific Concepts

Reviewer 3: Xarray-specific ?

- **Variable**: A named data array within a Zarr group, typically representing a measured or derived quantity
- **Dimension**: An axis of a multidimensional array (e.g., x, y, time, band)
- **Coordinate Variable**: An array that provides coordinate values along a dimension
- **Data Variable**: An array containing measured or derived data values

## General Rules

### Asset Organization

> 1. **A Zarr asset SHALL be a group containing one or more arrays**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. **A Zarr asset SHALL reference a group containing one or more arrays or groups**
```

>    This is equivalent to an xarray Dataset, ensuring that Zarr assets are accessible data containers rather than empty hierarchies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   This is equivalent to an xarray Dataset or an xarray DataTree.
```

2. **The Zarr store SHOULD be referenced with a link using the `"store"` relationship**

>    

Author: 💯 It needs to be justified. Current justification is that some applications need to access the root zarr store representing the item as a whole. Since we established recommendations that assets shall reference actual groups of data arrays, we believe it would be useful to have a link that actually reference the data store. I believe some information on the data store ([abstract store interface](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/index.html#abstract-store-interface)) may be needed at some point and this could be a good placeholder.

   ```json
   "links": [
     {
       "rel": "store",
       "href": "s3://bucket/path/data.zarr",
       "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=2",
       "title": "Zarr Store"
     }
   ]
   ```

> 3. **Assets can reference Zarr groups or individual arrays within the store**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. **Assets cannot reference individual arrays within the store**
```

   
   Assets may point to:
   - The root store

>    - Intermediate groups

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Sub groups
```

>    - Individual data variables/arrays

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

   
   The appropriate level depends on how users will access the data.

4. **Asset roles SHOULD clearly indicate the type of reference**
   
   - `"store"`: Reference to a complete Zarr store
   - `"group"`: Reference to a group within the store
   - `"data"`: Reference to individual data arrays

### Link Relationships

**Store Link Relationship**

A new link relationship `"store"` is used to reference Zarr stores from Collections or Items:

```json
"links": [
  {
    "rel": "store",
    "href": "s3://bucket/path/data.zarr",
    "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=2",
    "title": "Zarr Store"
  }
]
```

**TODO**: Propose this relationship for inclusion in the storage STAC extension.

**Media Type**

The media type for Zarr should include version information as a parameter:

- Zarr v2: `"application/vnd+zarr; version=2"`

> - Zarr v3: `"application/vnd+zarr; version=3"`

Reviewer 2: Should probably also add those in the table in [asset and link best practices](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-best-practices/blob/main/best-practices-asset-and-link.md#working-with-media-types)

This follows the pattern established by Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF:
```json
"type": "image/tiff; application=geotiff; profile=cloud-optimized"
```

> 

Author: This is a very interesting idea but seems to be a lot of work in my opinion to referenc all the possible combinations (e.g. EOPF)

### Metadata Requirements

> 1. **The datacube extension SHOULD be used to describe variables and dimensions when relevant**

Reviewer 2: Outcome of that is this issue: https://github.com/stac-extensions/datacube/issues/30 - proposing to merge the `cube:variables` and the `bands`

   
   For groups containing multiple variables, use `cube:variables` and `cube:dimensions` to document:
   - Available variables and their dimensional structure
   - Dimension extents and coordinate systems
   - Relationships between variables

2. **Band information SHOULD be provided for spectral/multi-channel data**
   

>    The `bands` array should contain keys corresponding to data variable names, with values providing band-specific metadata.

Reviewer 5: But in this case there are two bands?!

>    The `bands` array should contain keys corresponding to data variable names, with values providing band-specific metadata.

Author: IMO, this is a data provider choice. Discussions yesterday showed that this is not something we can provide recommendations for

>    The `bands` array should contain keys corresponding to data variable names, with values providing band-specific metadata.

Reviewer 6: Indeed, ESA did not approve to provide assets other than the ones present in measurements group.

```

**STAC Representation**:

```json
{
  "type": "Feature",
  "stac_version": "1.1.0",
  "id": "S2B_MSIL2A_20251006T123309",
  "properties": {
    "datetime": "2025-10-06T12:33:09Z"
  },
  "links": [
    {
      "rel": "store",
      "href": "s3://bucket/S2B_MSIL2A_20251006T123309.zarr",
      "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=2",
      "title": "Sentinel-2 L2A Zarr Store"
    }
  ],
  "assets": {
    "measurements_r10m": {
      "href": "s3://bucket/S2B_MSIL2A_20251006T123309.zarr/measurements/reflectance/r10m",
      "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=2",
      "roles": ["group", "data"],
      "raster:spatial_resolution": 10,
      "data_type": "uint16",
      "nodata": 0,
      "raster:scale": 0.0001,
      "raster:offset": 0.0,
      "proj:code": "EPSG:32628",
      "proj:shape": [10980, 10980],
      "cube:dimensions": {
        "x": {
          "type": "spatial",
          "axis": "x",
          "extent": [300000, 409800]
        },
        "y": {
          "type": "spatial",
          "axis": "y",
          "extent": [0, 109800]
        }
      },
      "cube:variables": {
        "b02": {
          "dimensions": ["y", "x"],
          "type": "data",

>           "unit": null

Reviewer 3: `unit` is not a mandatory field of the datacube extension, should we still keep it here?

Reviewer 2: I think the idea was to differentiate between the two cases:

- this variable is known to be unitless: `"unit": null
- unit information just wasn't included, so it could be anything

        },
        "b03": {
          "dimensions": ["y", "x"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": null
        },
        "b04": {
          "dimensions": ["y", "x"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": null
        },
        "b08": {
          "dimensions": ["y", "x"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": null
        }
      },
      "bands": [
        {
          "name": "b02",
          "eo:common_name": "blue",
          "description": "Blue band (490 nm)"
        },
        {
          "name": "b03",
          "eo:common_name": "green",
          "description": "Green band (560 nm)"
        },
        {
          "name": "b04",
          "eo:common_name": "red",
          "description": "Red band (665 nm)"

>         },

Reviewer 2: Yes, the name should be constructed in such a way that concatenating (meaning path joining) the `asset.href` and the `band.name` results in the right Zarr URL, e.g

```python
asset_href="s3://bucket/S2B_MSIL2A_20251006T123309.zarr/measurements/reflectance/r10m"
band_name="b02"

import zarr
red = zarr.open_array(asset_href + "/" + band_name)
```

        {
          "name": "b08",
          "eo:common_name": "nir",
          "description": "NIR band (842 nm)"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

**Key Points**:
- The store link provides the root Zarr location
- Assets point to specific resolution groups
- Common properties (data_type, resolution) are at asset level
- Band-specific metadata is in the `bands` array
- Variable names match array names in the Zarr group

### CF-Compliant Climate and Weather Data

**Context**: Climate model outputs and weather simulations often follow CF (Climate and Forecast) conventions and contain numerous variables with complex dimensional structures.

**Store Structure**:
```
s3://bucket/ICON_d3hp003.zarr/
└── P1D_mean_z5_atm/  (single group)
    ├── clivi (425, 12288) float32
    ├── clt (425, 12288) float32
    ├── hfls (425, 12288) float32
    ├── pr (425, 12288) float32
    ├── tas (425, 12288) float32

>     ├── ta (425, 12288, 30) float32  # 3D with pressure levels

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    ├── ta (425, 30, 12288) float32  # 3D with pressure levels
```
(swapped dimensions as in the longer review)

>     ├── time (425) datetime64[ns]

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    ├── time (425) int64 # seconds since some reference date
```
(datetime conversion only happens in xarray)

          "step": 1,
          "reference_system": "HEALPix"
        },
        "pressure": {
          "type": "vertical",
          "axis": "z",
          "description": "pressure level",
          "extent": [5.0, 100000.0],
          "unit": "Pa"
        }
      },
      "cube:variables": {
        "clivi": {
          "dimensions": ["time", "cell"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": "kg m-2",
          "description": "cloud ice path"
        },
        "clt": {
          "dimensions": ["time", "cell"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": "m2 m-2",
          "description": "total cloud cover"
        },
        "hfls": {
          "dimensions": ["time", "cell"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": "W m-2",
          "description": "surface upward latent heat flux"
        },
        "pr": {
          "dimensions": ["time", "cell"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": "kg m-2 s-1",
          "description": "precipitation flux"
        },
        "tas": {
          "dimensions": ["time", "cell"],
          "type": "data",
          "unit": "K",
          "description": "near-surface air temperature"
        },
        "ta": {

>           "dimensions": ["time", "cell", "pressure"],

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
          "dimensions": ["time", "pressure", "cell"],
```
cell usually is the fastest varying index.

    "source_data": {
      "href": "https://storage.example.com/data/CMIP6/rlus_day_CESM2-WACCM_ssp585_gn_20150101-20241231.nc",
      "type": "application/netcdf",
      "title": "Original NetCDF file",
      "roles": ["source"]
    }
  }
}
```

**Key Points**:
- The store link points to the reference file
- Assets include both the reference file and source data
- Media type indicates the reference format (e.g., JSON with zstd compression)
- Role `"reference"` indicates virtual/indirect data access
- Role `"source"` indicates the underlying data files

## Asset Discovery and Access Patterns

### Accessing Zarr Subgroups

For hierarchical stores, provide assets at meaningful organizational levels:

```json
"assets": {
  "measurements_r10m": {
    "href": "s3://bucket/data.zarr/measurements/reflectance/r10m",
    "roles": ["group", "data"],
    "description": "10m resolution measurements"
  },
  "measurements_r20m": {
    "href": "s3://bucket/data.zarr/measurements/reflectance/r20m",
    "roles": ["group", "data"],
    "description": "20m resolution measurements"
  }
}
```

### Multi-Resolution and Pyramid Data

EARLY DRAFT: to be updated with multiscale conventions in Zarr.

> For data with multiple resolutions (pyramids), each resolution level should be a separate asset:

Reviewer 2: So far that was our workaround for the `R10m/R20m/R60m` because there is no muli-scale concept in Zarr yet, but assuming Zarr supports multi-scales at some point I don't think if it's the best idea to model every resolution level as different assets. 

In the Sentinel sense multiscales over time kind of became different "products", but in the general sense they often are just a performance optimization for visualization (the classic COG pyramids for Dynamic WMS for example). In that case I don't think this approach is a good idea, as it will lead to lots of metadata duplication. Maybe an asset/band specific field could be used instead to indicate the available scales?

       "title": "Zarr Store"
     }
   ]
   ```

3. **Assets cannot reference individual arrays within the store**
   
   Assets may point to:
   - The root group
   - Sub groups
   
   The appropriate level depends on how users will access the data.

4. **Band names SHALL BE relative to the asset group and point to an array within that group**

    The band name shall be used as a relative path for accessing an array to point to a specific array within the group linked in the asset `href`.
    Implicitly, the band has the "data" role.

5. **Zarr STAC Extension SHOULD align with Zarr conventions (that are currently being defined) to clearly indicate the data model that best represents the asset**
   
   - `"multi-resolution"`: Reference to a multi-resolution datatree
   - `"single-resolution"`: Reference to a single resolution dataset

### Link Relationships

**Store Link Relationship**

A new link relationship `"store"` is used to reference Zarr stores from Collections or Items:

```json
"links": [
  {
    "rel": "store",
    "href": "s3://bucket/path/data.zarr",
    "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=2",
    "title": "Zarr Store"
  }
]
```

> **TODO**: Propose this relationship for inclusion in the storage STAC extension.

Author: Is it only about cloud storage? With the proliferation of file store type and implementation, I expect more need to address store interfaces. On the other hand, Zarr is designed for cloud storage and it would make sense to me to have storage specifics in that extension.

> **TODO**: Propose this relationship for inclusion in the storage STAC extension.

Author: discussion moved to https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/discussions/1367

**Store Structure**:
```
/
├── conditions/
├── measurements/
│   └── reflectance/     
│       ├── r10m/
│       │   ├── b02 (10980, 10980) uint16
│       │   ├── b03 (10980, 10980) uint16
│       │   ├── b04 (10980, 10980) uint16
│       │   ├── b08 (10980, 10980) uint16
│       │   ├── x (10980,) int64
│       │   └── y (10980,) int64
│       ├── r20m/
│       └── r60m/   
└── quality/
```

1 big reflectance STAC Representation**

```json
{
  "type": "Feature",
  "stac_version": "1.1.0",
  "id": "S2B_MSIL2A_20251006T123309",
  "properties": {
    "datetime": "2025-10-06T12:33:09Z"
  },
  "links": [
    {
      "rel": "store",
      "href": "s3://bucket/S2B_MSIL2A_20251006T123309.zarr",
      "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=2",
      "title": "Sentinel-2 L2A Zarr Store"
    }
  ],
  "assets": {
    "reflectance": {
              "gsd": 10,
              "href": "https://objects.eodc.eu:443/e05ab01a9d56408d82ac32d69a5aae2a:202510-s02msil2a-eu/14/products/cpm_v256/S2C_MSIL2A_20251014T142151_N0511_R096_T25WET_20251014T161521.zarr/measurements/reflectance/",
              "type": "application/vnd+zarr",
              "bands": [       

>                   {"name": "r20m/B01", "common_name": "coastal", "description": "Coastal aerosol (band 1)", "center_wavelength": 0.443, "full_width_half_max": 0.027,   },

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
                  {"name": "r20m/B01", "common_name": "coastal", "description": "Coastal aerosol (band 1)", "center_wavelength": 0.443, "full_width_half_max": 0.027},
```

    ├── time (425) int64 # seconds since some reference date
    ├── cell (12288) int32
    └── pressure (30) float32
```

The [example STAC Item](examples/ICON_d3hp003_cf.json) represents a Zarr store containing multiple CF-compliant variables with different dimensional structures.

**Key Points**:

- Single asset represents a Zarr group with multiple CF variables
- Multiple dimension types: temporal, spatial (non-standard grid), vertical
- Variables have different dimensional structures (2D vs 3D)
- CF standard names are preserved using a `cf:` prefix
- The `bands` array provides human-readable variable descriptions
- Non-geographic spatial reference system (HEALPix) is indicated

### Virtual Zarr with Reference Files

**Context**: Kerchunk and similar tools create virtual Zarr stores that reference existing data files (e.g., NetCDF) without copying data. This enables Zarr-like access to legacy formats.

The [example STAC Item](examples/CMIP6_ScenarioMIP_NCAR_CESM2.json) represents a virtual Zarr store defined by a Kerchunk reference file.

**Key Points**:

- The kerchunk reference file is considered as the data store and thus is reference as a link with `rel: store`

> - Assets include both the reference file and source data

Reviewer 8: Looking at the example, I would assume this is an example for an item, not a collection. Is that right? I think we should have an example for both items and collections and make sure the practice is not uniquely applicable to kerchunk.

- Asset metadata for multi-resolution and hierarchical data structures

The following specifications and extensions are discussed in this document:

- [STAC v1.1](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/tree/v1.1.0)
- [Datacube Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/datacube)
- [Raster Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/raster)
- [Electro Optical (EO) Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/eo)
- [Projection Extension v2.x](https://github.com/stac-extensions/projection)

## Glossary

### Zarr Terminology

See the [Zarr specification](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/#concepts-and-terminology) for complete terminology.

Key terms:

- **Zarr Store**: A storage system that can hold a Zarr hierarchy (e.g., a directory, zip file, or object store prefix) conforming to the [Zarr abstract store interface](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/index.html#abstract-store-interface)
- **Group**: Any node - including the root node - in a Zarr hierarchy that may have child nodes.
- **Array**: A leaf node in a Zarr hierarchy that represents a multidimensional array with chunked storage

> - **Chunk**: A contiguous region of an array that is stored as a single object

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- **Chunk**: A contiguous region of an array that is stored as a single object. In the case of sharded arrays, chunks may contain "inner-chunks". The outer chunk is referred to as the "shard".
```

### Xarray/NetCDF/CF-Specific Concepts

- **Variable**: A named data array within a Zarr group, typically representing a measured or derived quantity
- **Dimension**: An axis of a multidimensional array (e.g., x, y, time, band)
- **Coordinate Variable**: An array that provides coordinate values along a dimension
- **Data Variable**: An array containing measured or derived data values

## General Rules

### Asset Organization

1. **A Zarr asset href SHALL reference a group in the Zarr hierarchy**

   A single Zarr asset corresponds to a Zarr group, which may contain multiple arrays and subgroups.
   This is equivalent to an xarray Dataset or an xarray DataTree.

2. **Bands within an asset SHALL reference an array within the asset group**

   Individual arrays within the store SHOULD NOT be represented as separate assets.

>    The appropriate level depends on how users will access the data.

Reviewer 10: Weather and climate typically has deep hierarchical nesting, with multiple layers of subgrouping. There is not really a single appropriate level for users as a whole.

This is something we already struggle with for representing datacube data in STAC, when we are trying to map STAC to our raw datacubes (non-Zarr). We proposed the linked templates extension, with the ability to apply this to child links, to handle this problem neatly:
https://github.com/stac-extensions/link-templates/issues/1

I think the same issue is surfacing here (but instead of catalogs and items, its assets and variables/bands). Flattening the multi-dimensional cube into a list of assets just doesn't do justice to the n-dimensional structure of a datacube. Also the size becomes enormous -- it can work for lower-dimension or smaller datacubes, but not for larger datacubes.

Using the linkTemplate, as described further down this document, for individual arrays helps a little, but I think linkTemplating should be allowed at the asset/group level, then we could do something like:

```
"assets": {
  "forecast": {
    "type": "application/vnd+zarr; version=3",
    "title": "Ensemble Forecast for <date>",
    "linkTemplate": {
      "rel": "data",
      "title": "Forecast field",
      "uriTemplate": "s3://bucket/path/forecast.zarr/{ensemble_member}/{step}/",
      "variables": {
        "ensemble_member": {
          "description": "Index or identifier of ensemble member",
          "type": "string",
          "enum": [
            "1",
            "2",
            "3",
            ...
            "50"
          ]
        },
        "step": {
          "description": "Forecast lead time (e.g., 6h, 12h, 24h)",
          "type": "string",
          "enum": [
            "1",
            "2",
            "3",
            ...
            "360"
          ]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

This only shows a 2D example but would generalise pretty well to any N-dimensional structure. Plain enum's used here but you could also use more appropriate template schemas.

Within these groups we still have a large number of variables/"bands" which also benefit from link templates.

Author: What is the step level pointing to? Group or array?

### Virtual Zarr with Reference Files

**Context**: Kerchunk and similar tools create virtual Zarr stores that reference existing data files (e.g., NetCDF) without copying data. This enables Zarr-like access to legacy formats.

**STAC Representation**:

```json
{
  "type": "Feature",
  "stac_version": "1.1.0",
  "id": "CMIP6_ScenarioMIP_NCAR_CESM2",
  "properties": {
    "start_datetime": "2015-01-01T00:00:00Z",
    "end_datetime": "2024-12-31T23:59:59Z"
  },
  "links": [
    {
      "rel": "store",
      "href": "https://storage.example.com/kerchunk/CMIP6_CESM2_rlus_kr1.0.json",
      "type": "application/json+zstd",
      "title": "Kerchunk Reference File"
    }
  ],
  "assets": {
    "source_data": {
      "href": "https://storage.example.com/data/CMIP6/rlus_day_CESM2-WACCM_ssp585_gn_20150101-20241231.nc",
      "type": "application/netcdf",
      "title": "Original NetCDF file",
      "roles": ["source"]
    }
  }
}
```

**Key Points**:

- The kerchunk reference file is considered as the data store and thus is reference as a link with `rel: store`
- Assets include both the reference file and source data
- Role `"reference"` indicates virtual/indirect data access

> - Role `"source"` indicates the underlying data files

Reviewer 11: Don't think these points match the example above, since the Assets don't include a reference file. Should Virtual Zarr files follow the same principle of the normal Zarr files if they reference a group of arrays they belong in Assets if they are a Zarr store they should be included in the links?
